README.md, before:

# Chesssir
### High Performance C++20 Chess Engine

A UCI compatible chess engine built with a focus on low latency algorithms with a modern, sleek design. 

---
> Self-taught C++20 in 3 months | Nov 2025 - Jan 2026
## Features

- **Bitboard board representation** ultra fast move generation with O(1) hardware accelerated bitwise operations.
- **Optimised algorithms** with alpha-beta pruning and zobrist hashing in transposition tables, evaluating > <u>500K nodes per second</u>
- **Test-Driven development** with comprehensive unit tests through the GTest framework
- **UCI protocol integration** allowing compatibility with all major chess platforms, including chess.com and lichess.org.
---

## Architecture & Design

1. **Hybrid board representation solution** 
   The core of a chess engine is millions of calculations of moving pieces on an 8 x 8 chessboard. Instead of a naive 8 x 8 array of pieces, the primary board representation uses a series of `uint64_t` allocating one bit per square. 
   - Why: This allows a single CPU operation (e.g., << or &) to perform multiple useful operations, such as generating all the pawn pushes or king attacks. This leverages bit-level parallelism, mimicking  the SIMD (single instruction, multiple data) technique by performing multiple logical operations on all 64 squares simultaneously.
   - Visualisation:
    ```bash 
    White Pawns (0x000000000000FF00)
    8  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    7  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    6  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    5  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    4  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    3  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    2  [ 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 ]
    1  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
        a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h
    ```
     - Drawbacks of the sole bitboard approach include requiring O(n) to search through bits to find the exact locations of pieces, which is essential to move generation (think `for each piece do`), which is why, additionally, the use of [Piece Lists](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Piece-Lists) and [Mailboxes](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Mailbox) are used for board representation. Although three simultaneous representations seems overkill, updating each only ever requires a single operation, and the combination of the three allows any operation/query to <u> always run in constant time </u>

1. **State Management: Zobrist Hashing** 
To handle hashing positions to be stored in the Transposition Table, Zobrist Hashing was implemented, where for each piece, a `uint64_t` is randomly allocated and then XORed together.
- Efficiency: Instead of re-hashing the full board after each move, O(n), the nature of the Zobrist Hash allows a single XOR operation for an O(1) incremental update.
- Impact: This allows the engine to recognise previously searched positions, and save time re-searching, resulting in an average increase of <u> 120% more nodes per second </u> even after the cost of probing the table.
- Drawbacks: The number of possible chess positions is extremely large, much larger than could ever be used to index a hashmap, and a `uint64_t` cannot fully guarantee there are no hash collisions (when two completely different positions happen to give the same hash) however, at less than 10<sup>-6</sup>, this is statistically insigifcant and thus justifies the performance benefits.

2. **Build system & Test-Driven Development**
- Utilising CMake's build configuration ensure seemless building across platforms, and allows a clean, modularized code structure.
- GTest unit testing to ensure any changes / further development can never subtly affect other modules. This is vital for a complex project such as a chess engine, as many bugs can easily be introduced, which may stay undetected in the code base. Following the TDD principles, tests are written first, and code after, every piece of code is unit tested, such as move generation using a standardised [Perft](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft) test, ensuring the engine can only ever play legal moves.

---

## Performance benchmarks

Performance is measured with a combination of Nodes Per Second (NPS) and the total number of branches required to search.

| Feature | NPS (Before) | NPS (After) | Performance
| ------- | ------------ | ----------- |------------
|Unoptimised search | ~210K | - | Baseline
|Incremental hashing & eval | ~210K | ~260K | 24% increase
| Transposition table | ~260K | ~ 700K | 170% increase
| Alpha beta pruning | - | - | ~90% branch reduction

> \*_Note: performance is an estimate, actual performance can vary based on your system_

--- 

## Verification & Correctness

To ensure the integrity of the move generation in all types of positions, the engine is validated against the standardized **Perft** (Performance Test) benchmarks. This is a test that verifies the number of leaf nodes that can be reached from a given depth, which can be verified against known, correct values.

### Perft Results (Standard Start Position)

| Depth | Result (Chessir) | Expected | Status |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| 1 | 20 | 20 | ✅ |
|2 | 400 | 400 | ✅ |
| 3 | 8902 | 8902 | ✅ |
|4 | 197281 | 197281 |  ✅|
|5 | 4865609 |4865609 | ✅|

> **Full verification**: I utilized a suite of "tricky" test positions from [The Chess Programming Wiki](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft_Results) at high depths to validate complex edge cases such as en passant, promotions, and castling.


## Upcoming
- **Magic bitboards**: Implementing faster sliding piece move generation
- **Lock free parallel search** using C++20 thread for multi-core high performance

Commit message:

Development & learning process
Development and learning process, with an added AI usage disclosure

README.md, after:

# Chesssir
### High Performance C++20 Chess Engine

A UCI compatible chess engine built with a focus on low latency algorithms with a modern, sleek design. 

---
> Self-taught C++20 in 3 months | Nov 2025 - Jan 2026
## Features

- **Bitboard board representation** ultra fast move generation with O(1) hardware accelerated bitwise operations.
- **Optimised algorithms** with alpha-beta pruning and zobrist hashing in transposition tables, evaluating > <u>500K nodes per second</u>
- **Test-Driven development** with comprehensive unit tests through the GTest framework
- **UCI protocol integration** allowing compatibility with all major chess platforms, including chess.com and lichess.org.
---

## Architecture & Design

1. **Hybrid board representation solution** 
   The core of a chess engine is millions of calculations of moving pieces on an 8 x 8 chessboard. Instead of a naive 8 x 8 array of pieces, the primary board representation uses a series of `uint64_t` allocating one bit per square. 
   - Why: This allows a single CPU operation (e.g., << or &) to perform multiple useful operations, such as generating all the pawn pushes or king attacks. This leverages bit-level parallelism, mimicking  the SIMD (single instruction, multiple data) technique by performing multiple logical operations on all 64 squares simultaneously.
   - Visualisation:
    ```bash 
    White Pawns (0x000000000000FF00)
    8  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    7  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    6  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    5  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    4  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    3  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
    2  [ 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 ]
    1  [ 0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 ]
        a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h
    ```
     - Drawbacks of the sole bitboard approach include requiring O(n) to search through bits to find the exact locations of pieces, which is essential to move generation (think `for each piece do`), which is why, additionally, the use of [Piece Lists](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Piece-Lists) and [Mailboxes](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Mailbox) are used for board representation. Although three simultaneous representations seems overkill, updating each only ever requires a single operation, and the combination of the three allows any operation/query to <u> always run in constant time </u>

2. **State Management: Zobrist Hashing** 
To handle hashing positions to be stored in the Transposition Table, Zobrist Hashing was implemented, where for each piece, a `uint64_t` is randomly allocated and then XORed together.
- Efficiency: Instead of re-hashing the full board after each move, O(n), the nature of the Zobrist Hash allows a single XOR operation for an O(1) incremental update.
- Impact: This allows the engine to recognise previously searched positions, and save time re-searching, resulting in an average increase of <u> 120% more nodes per second </u> even after the cost of probing the table.
- Drawbacks: The number of possible chess positions is extremely large, much larger than could ever be used to index a hashmap, and a `uint64_t` cannot fully guarantee there are no hash collisions (when two completely different positions happen to give the same hash) however, at less than 10<sup>-6</sup>, this is statistically insigifcant and thus justifies the performance benefits.

3. **Build system & Test-Driven Development**
- Utilising CMake's build configuration ensure seemless building across platforms, and allows a clean, modularized code structure.
- GTest unit testing to ensure any changes / further development can never subtly affect other modules. This is vital for a complex project such as a chess engine, as many bugs can easily be introduced, which may stay undetected in the code base. Following the TDD principles, tests are written first, and code after, every piece of code is unit tested, such as move generation using a standardised [Perft](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft) test, ensuring the engine can only ever play legal moves.

---

## Performance benchmarks

Performance is measured with a combination of Nodes Per Second (NPS) and the total number of branches required to search.

| Feature | NPS (Before) | NPS (After) | Performance
| ------- | ------------ | ----------- |------------
|Unoptimised search | ~210K | - | Baseline
|Incremental hashing & eval | ~210K | ~260K | 24% increase
| Transposition table | ~260K | ~ 700K | 170% increase
| Alpha beta pruning | - | - | ~90% branch reduction

> \*_Note: performance is an estimate, actual performance can vary based on your system_

--- 

## Verification & Correctness

To ensure the integrity of the move generation in all types of positions, the engine is validated against the standardized **Perft** (Performance Test) benchmarks. This is a test that verifies the number of leaf nodes that can be reached from a given depth, which can be verified against known, correct values.

### Perft Results (Standard Start Position)

| Depth | Result (Chessir) | Expected | Status |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| 1 | 20 | 20 | ✅ |
|2 | 400 | 400 | ✅ |
| 3 | 8902 | 8902 | ✅ |
|4 | 197281 | 197281 |  ✅|
|5 | 4865609 |4865609 | ✅|

> **Full verification**: I utilized a suite of "tricky" test positions from [The Chess Programming Wiki](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft_Results) at high depths to validate complex edge cases such as en passant, promotions, and castling.

## Development & Learning process

This project was not actually my first attempt at developing a Chess Engine. Between 2022 and 2023, I started my journey of chess programming with a simple (Vanilla) JavaScript project, inspired by Sebastian Lagues [Coding Adventure: Chess](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4ogK0MIzqk). This seemed like a natural development from my simpler predecessor project of solving Tic Tac Toe; little did I know the complexity of the algorithmic design and project management that would be required, leaving me with a finished project with unbelievably poor performance and spaghetti code. Ironically, this project was my first ever C++ project - the way I learned the language in effect - I know all too many who never learn the required depth after getting stuck in "tutorial hell" and can never leave the assistance of beginner sites, etc.

### Learning resources

Some of my top resources for learning C++ include (https://www.learncpp.com/) for general language-specific documentation, as well as (https://cppreference.com/). For chess programming specific queries, [The Chess Programming Wiki](https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft_Results) was a massive help - even if every developer designs their own engine in a completely unique way, this site really helped with the fundamentals.

### AI usage disclaimer

The core chess engine and algorithmic implementation of this project is entirely original, with no AI assistance. However claude.ai was used to generate initial templates for  the `.gitignore` and `CMakeLists.txt` to save time. Furthermore, Command-line-interface AI has been used in this project to give a unqiue evaluation to key design decisions and help to address code quality. I found this useful to get another perspective to challenge my ideas during this process, however as the project developed I rapidly found that AI tools in general were not providing quality answers/insights due to the high complexity and unique style of development for this project. Due to AI tools progressively hallucinating more, and requiring a large amount of correcting and direction from me (defeating the purpose) these tools were phased out as development processes, and replaced with more detailed testing to ensure a bug-free project. Google's AI Overview in search was also utilised for syntax searches, significantly reducing time to search official docs or stackoverflow for simple language-specific queries.

## Upcoming
- **Magic bitboards**: Implementing faster sliding piece move generation
- **Lock free parallel search** using C++20 thread for multi-core high performance
